rewrote what is chalk docs (#357)
chalk-ai/docs: what-is-chalk.mdx

---
title: What is Chalk?
metaTitle: What is Chalk?

> metaDescription: 'Chalk is a data platform for inference that enables innovative machine learning teams to focus on building the unique products and models that make their business stand out.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
metaDescription: 'Chalk is the data platform for inference that enables innovative machine learning teams to focus on building the unique products and models that make their business stand out.'
```

<DocsHero />

> Build, deploy, and iterate faster with Chalk--a programmable feature engine that powers low-latency inference, rapid model iteration, and observability across your model-lifecycle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Build, deploy, and iterate faster with Chalk — a programmable feature engine that powers low-latency inference, rapid model iteration, and observability across your model-lifecycle.
```

Chalk solves core pain points teams face when building enterprise AI and ML systems:

- deploying and scaling production-grade infrastructure

> - authoring feature pipelines in pure Python – No DSLs! No rewrites!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- authoring feature pipelines in pure Python — No DSLs! No rewrites!
```

- building training datasets with high throughput batch offline queries and point-in-time correctness
- evaluating LLMs at scale by integrating unstructured inputs into pipelines
- serving fresh features on-the-fly with versioning, branching, and full observability
    - gradually rollout, easily rollback, and feature flag models with version control
    - collaborate across teams with branch-based QA
    - A/B test with real historical production traffic by leveraging Chalk’s feature store

## How does Chalk make feature engineering easier?

> Chalk lets you define features using Pythonic dataclasses–just like Pydantic–no DSLs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chalk lets you define features using Pythonic classes — no DSLs.
```

Every feature is:
- typed and validated
- versioned and testable
- composable and reusable in both training and online inference

> Describe relationships between entities (e.g. users and transactions) with simple type annotations and Chalk takes care of joins, lineage, and query planning automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Describe relationships between entities (e.g., users and transactions) with simple type annotations, and Chalk takes care of joins, lineage, and query planning automatically.
```

@features
class Transaction:
    id: int
    amount: float
    discount_percentage: float

    # create new features inline with Chalk Expressions
    is_expensive_purchase: bool = _.amount > 100

    # instead of user_id being a str type -> user_id: str
    # we can point to a feature from another class
    user_id: "User.id"

    # Chalk infers the join key enabling us to reference
    # the User associated with this transaction!
    user: "User"

@features
class User:
    # id, name, email are pulled from underlying data sources like
    # SQL (Postgres, Athena, Glue, Iceberg), Snowflake, Databricks, Kafka streams, etc.
    id: int
    name: str
    email: str

    # computed via a Python resolver, more on this later
    username: str

    # Chalk SDK provides common ML primitives
    name_match: float = F.levenshtein_distance(_.name, _.email)

    # Leverage "User.id" type annotation from Transaction class
    # as a join key to create intermediary dataframes
    txns: DataFrame[Transaction]

    # reference dataframes to run aggregations
    transaction_count: int = _.txns.count()

    # easily filter dataframes before running an aggregation

>     average_discount_percentage: float = _.txns[_.discount_percentage > 0].mean()

Reviewer: this is missing a field on which the aggregation is being performed. probably needs to project out the amount or something like that

Author: done!

    # run aggregations across time intervals
    total_transaction_amount: Windowed[float] = windowed(
        "1d",
        "7d",
        "30d",

>         expression=_.txns[_.amount].sum(),

Author: done!

 17    "2024-12-06T19:53:21.575073+00:00"  "failed"            27       16281       2           34                        20364                               "2024-12-06T00:36:07.348750+00:00"
 18    "2024-11-27T01:50:03.002378+00:00"  "failed"            27       16282       1           71.41                     20362                               "2024-11-26T11:29:03.684327+00:00"
 5440  null                                "pending"           27       16357       1           62.64                     20180                               "2024-11-16T17:29:43.540722+00:00"
 67    "2024-11-29T04:08:29.746079+00:00"  "cleared"           27       16358       1           86.31                     20179                               "2024-11-28T04:11:31.857431+00:00"
 68    "2024-11-11T11:35:40.673632+00:00"  "cleared"           27       16359       1           138.38                    20178                               "2024-11-11T01:19:53.140456+00:00"

(5 rows)

```

When running this query, Chalk only fetches exactly the base features needed to return `name_match` and `txns`.

Chalk analyzes type annotations to build a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of feature dependencies.

> At inference time, query plans tailored to your input/output schema are generated dynamically by slicing this DAG into sub-graphs--ensuring that only the features needed are fetched--optimizing for speed, precision, and cost.

Reviewer: could we replace these with emdashes?

> Note: We build a DAG instead of a tree to prevent redundant feature computations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Each node in the DAG is a Chalk expression or resolver (SQL / Python):

> - lambda like Chalk expression e.g. `is_expensive_purchase: bool = _.amount > 100`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An expression e.g. `is_expensive_purchase: bool = _.amount > 100`
```

> - SQL resolver that connects to an underlying data store like Athena

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A SQL file that connects to an underlying data store like Athena
```

- Python resolver i.e. ordinary Python functions (Pandas, httpx, or LLM calls)

Here's an example of a generated query plan:

![Chalk query plan](/img/docs-what_is_chalk-query_plan.png)

### How does Chalk resolve features? What are Chalk resolvers?

Chalk connects directly to your existing infrastructure and underlying data stores (Athena, Bigquery, Postgres, Iceberg catalog, etc.) with [SQL resolvers](https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/sql-resolvers) and to APIs (microservices, 3rd part clients, LLMs) with [Python resolvers.](https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/python-resolvers)

> Resolvers make it easy to integrate a wide variety of data sources, join them together, and use them in inference, while Chalk abstracts away dependency resolution and low-latency model execution.

Reviewer: do we want to say model execution here?

Author: reworded this!

Decoupling feature logic and model execution from underlying ETL results in

- faster iteration without pipeline rebuilds
- on-demand just-in-time inference
- reproducible and testable features with point-in-time accuracy

<IntegrationTypes />

### How does Chalk orchestrate and manage features?

> Chalk has built-in support for feature engineering workflows -- there's no need to manage Airflow or orchestrate complicated streaming flows.

Reviewer: emdash

Author: Done!

Once we've defined our features and resolvers, Chalk orchestrates them into flexible pipelines (slicing the DAG) that make both training and model execution easy.

In the `get_username` function below we explicitly define input dependencies through `User.email` and specify the output feature type as `User.username`:

```py
@online
def get_username(

>     email: User.email, # use type annotation to tell Chalk what feature to transform

Reviewer: let's put these comments above the annotation because we're usually trying to save horizontal space so this looks kind of reasonable on mobile

Author: Done!

Chalk simplifies

- deploying production-grade infrastructure for low-latency (< 10ms) inference at scale
- developing feature pipelines - use pure Python to express our features as data classes and write functions with libraries and tools we're familiar with instead of specialized DSLs
- experimenting and iterating on models - data-as-code enables model versioning and A/B
- sharing features and collaborating across teams with branch deploys (single source of truth with data-as-code)
- building datasets for training and simulating models with historical production traffic
- incorporating unstructured data sources with LLMs into ML pipelines

## How do I express my features in Chalk?

To get started, we define our features with Pydantic-inspired Python classes.
We can define schemas, specify relationships, materialize/tile features, assign ownership, and isolate features across environments, all with code.

```py
import chalk.functions as F
from chalk import features, DataFrame, Windowed, windowed, _

@features
class Transaction:
    id: int
    amount: float
    discount_percentage: float

>     is_expensive_purchase: bool = _.amount > 100 # create new features inline with Chalk Expressions

Reviewer: let's lift these comments next to the code to above -- it makes these lines pretty long

### How does Chalk work?

Chalk has built-in support for feature engineering workflows -- there's no need to manage Airflow or orchestrate complicated streaming flows.
Once we've defined our features and resolvers, Chalk orchestrates them into flexible pipelines (slicing the DAG) that make both training and model execution easy.

In the `get_username` function below we explicitly tell Chalk where each input paramater comes from, `User.email` and what feature(s) this function returns `User.username`:

```py
@online
def get_username(
    email: User.email, # use type annotation to tell Chalk what feature to transform
) -> User.username: # the resulting feature is saved as username
    username = email.split("@")[0]
    if "gmail.com" in email:
        username = username.split("+")[0].replace(".", "")

    return username.lower()
```

The `get_username` function above, although written in Python, gets converted into static expressions that are executed natively with Velox.
We wrote an [engineering blog post on our Symbolic Python interpreter.](https://chalk.ai/blog/symbolic-python-interpreter)

```py

> lower(

Reviewer: i think the inner is intended one tab too many here

    email: User.email,
    # the resulting feature is saved as username
) -> User.username:
    username = email.split("@")[0]
    if "gmail.com" in email:
        username = username.split("+")[0].replace(".", "")

    return username.lower()
```

The `get_username` function above, although written in Python, compiles into a static Velox expression through Chalk's Symbolic Python Interpreter and is executed natively in C++.
This provides Python-first development without sacrificing sub-5ms inference latency.

```py
lower(
    if_then_else(
        !=(
            strpos(str(email), str(gmail.com)),
            int(0)
        ),
        replace(
            element_at(
                split(
                    element_at(split(str(email), str(@)), int(1)),
                    str(+)
                ),
                int(1)
            ),
            str(.),
            str()
        ),
        element_at(split(str(email), str(@)), int(1))
    )
)
```

We wrote an [engineering blog post on our Symbolic Python interpreter](https://chalk.ai/blog/symbolic-python-interpreter) if you want to learn more!

### How can I cache features in Chalk?

> Some data sources–like LLMs or 3rd party APIs are expensive or slow to call at inference time,  Chalk supports caching features to optimize for latency and cost:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some data sources, like LLMs or 3rd party APIs, are expensive or slow to call at inference time. Chalk supports caching features to optimize for latency and cost:
```

- define cache windows inline with your features
- override staleness at query-time when fresh data is critical
- pre-warm caches and backfill pipelines for performance

Add a caching policy with one line of code in our feature definition:

<PyDiffEditor html={addCachingCode} />

### How do I deploy and query features with Chalk?

Once we've defined our pipelines, deploy features to a branch in < 30s with:

```shell
chalk apply --branch=elvis
```

> We can then query for features against this branch and perform QA workflows on our preview environment to make sure that our Chalk deployment performs as expected:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can then query for features against this branch and perform QA workflows on our branch deployment to make sure that our pipelines perform as expected:
```

```shell

> chalk query --branch=elvis --in user.id=47

Reviewer: would be nice to show the output here, too. Also, I think it's worth calling out that this picks up the name of the git branch by default, instead of using explicitly named branches

Author: done!

```

Once validated, promote the deployment to production,
which is served at a unique preview URL.

```shell
chalk apply
```

> These features are now available for low-latency online inference and [offline training](https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/training-client).

Reviewer: can we link online inference here?

Author: hyperlinked to https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/query-basics

The ability to re-use the same features in both contexts dramatically shortens development time and ensures that feature values from online and offline contexts match.

> ## Why Chalk?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---

## Why Chalk?
```

Chalk is the first platform to unify feature engineering, LLM orchestration, and real-time inference under a single abstraction: programmable features.

> At the core, Chalk retrieves and computes features dynamically at inference time with an execution engine called Velox.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chalk retrieves and computes features dynamically at inference time with an execution engine called Velox.
```

Reviewer: also let's hyperlink the velox github

> We maintain a fork that’s been heavily optimized for low-latency (< 10ms).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We maintain a fork that’s been heavily optimized for low-latency (< 3ms).
```

> This enables teams to:

Reviewer: should clarify "This" here

- consolidate training and serving into a single version controlled environment
- reduce time-to-production for new models from months to days
- build advanced AI systems (RAG, RecSys, fraud, etc.) without building custom infrastructure

> You write Python. Chalk handles orchestrating, caching, and serving features at scale, resulting in faster iterations, fewer bugs, and the freedom to focus on building models—not plumbing.

Reviewer: in general, there's some switching between "you", "we", and more imperative voice "Once validated, deploy ...". I'm not sure exactly which one we should use, but I think we could be more consistent.

> ## Chalk for MLOps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---

## Chalk for MLOps
```

Bridge the gap between experimentation and production with a single system that unifies feature engineering, deployment, and observability.

**No DSLs, building with Chalk is building with Python**

> Chalk gives MLOps teams the tools to deploy enterprise-grade infrastructure with a superb developer experience. Define features in Python that are run natively in Rust, C++, or as UDFs—no need to manually port notebooks and code into other languages e.g. Scala.

Reviewer: emdash

Chalk takes it a step further by democratizing modern software engineering practices for data teams:

- features are discoverable and auditable across all environments
- experimental changes are isolated to branches and safely promoted via CLI with gradual rollouts
- models are versioned and can be easily rolled-back the same way you would an API

With SDKs available in multiple languages, you can easily serve features across your entire tech stack, empowering everyone from data scientists using Python to frontend developers in JavaScript and backend engineers working with Java.

<RequestingFeaturesOnline style={{ height: 328 }} />

**Observability**

Chalk enables teams to monitor and trace features back to the source, reducing governance bottlenecks by providing audit-ready records of all inputs and outputs for compliance.

- tracks the inputs, outputs and latencies of every step in any inference for debugging and monitoring
- provides detailed feature lineage showing data provenance and transformation history
- enables real-time monitoring of feature drift, access patterns, and performance across model deployments

> Chalk transforms observability from a technical challenge into a strategic advantage, giving you the confidence to deploy and iterate on ML systems with full visibility and control.

Reviewer: technical challenge -> strategic advantage is a little odd as a transition. i think some more parallel would sound nicer here (vulnerability -> strength)

> ## Chalk for AI Engineers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---

## Chalk for AI Engineers
```

Reviewer: any time we use an h2, we put a line break. no line breaks on h3s if you want to use those under a heading of something like the persona

    merchant_id: Merchant.id
    merchant: Merchant
    receipt: Receipt

    llm: P.PromptResponse = P.completion(
        model="gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18",
        messages=[P.user_message(
            "””Analyze the following receipt:
            Line items: {{Transaction.receipt.line_items}}
            Merchant: {{Transaction.merchant.name}} {{Transaction.merchant.description}}”””
        )],
        output_structure=AnalyzedReceiptStruct,
    )

@features
class ProductRec:
    user_id: Primary[str]
    user: User

    user_vector: Vector = embed(
        input=F.array_join(F.array_agg(
            _.user.products[
                _.name,
                _.type == "liked"
            ]),
            delimiter=" || ",
        ),
        provider="vertexai",
        model="text-embedding-005",
    )

    similar_users: DataFrame[User] = has_many(
      lambda: ProductRec.user_vector.is_near(
            User.liked_products_vector
        )
    )
```

With Chalk, AI engineers get a fully managed feature platform to focus on building and deploying AI-powered applications rather than deploying infrastructure, debugging data pipelines, or managing vector databases.

> ## Chalk for Data Scientists

Reviewer: line break

from chalk.client import ChalkClient

client = ChalkClient(branch="elvis")
client.load_features() # load prod features with one line

User.name_exclaimed = _.name + "!" # add new features

chalk_dataset = client.offline_query(
    input={
        User.id: list(range(1000)),
    },
    output={
        User.id,
        User.name,
        User.name_exclaimed,
    },
    recompute_features=True, # A/B test against historical model runs
    run_asynchronously=True,
    dataset_name="<dataset_name>",
)

df = chalk_dataset.to_pandas() # convert to pandas dataframe

# write to Glue or Iceberg
catalog = GlueCatalog(
    name="aws_glue_catalog",
    aws_region="us-west-2",
    catalog_id="123",
    aws_role_arn="arn:aws:iam::123456789012:role/OurCatalogueAccessRole",
)
chalk_dataset.write_to(destination="database.table_name", catalog=catalog)
```

Chalk evaluates features with point-in-time lookups guaranteeing evaluation only with data that would have been seen in the past, this means that you can provide labels with different past timestamps to easily get historical features that represent what your application would have retrieved online at those past times.

<TemporalCorrectness />

> With Chalk, Data scientists easily integrate new data sources, prototype with guaranteed point-in-time correctness, and collaborate with branches and data exports.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Chalk, data scientists easily integrate new data sources, prototype with guaranteed point-in-time correctness, and collaborate with branches and data exports.
```

> ## Chalk for Data Engineers

Reviewer: line break

Manage features declaratively--with a few lines of code--all without the complexity of orchestrating ETL jobs, feature stores, and offline/online datastores.

- cache expensive computations with configurable staleness
- manage versioning and A/B testing of feature computation
- create complex joins and relationships between data entities
- configure time-window aggregations with flexible materialization options

```python
@features
class User:
    id: int
    domain: str

    # composite keys that can be used as join keys
    workspace_id: str = _.domain + "-" + _.id
    expensive_api_call: str = feature(max_staleness="30d") # cache values

    # maintain different resolvers to A/B test function calls e.g. gemini vs openai
    llm_response: str = feature(version=3)

    # multi-attribute joins
    txns: DataFrame[Transaction] = has_many(
        lamda: (User.id == Transaction.user_id) & (User.domain == Transaction.domain)

>     )

Reviewer: this hardly works. I tihnk we should stick to a single key join -- seems fine to have only transactions joined on user.

Author: switched to signle key

    count_txns: Windowed[int] = windowed(
        "1d", "365d",
        materialization={
            # 1-day buckets for the 365d window
            bucket_duration="1d",
            bucket_durations={
                # 10-minute buckets for the 1d window
                "10m": "1d",
            }

>         },

Reviewer: maybe we just go with `materialization=True` and link to the docs on this?

        expression=_.txns.count(),
    )
```

Chalk also integrates natively into your existing data infrastructure by deploying directly into your virtual private cloud (VPC) providing seamless resource access while maintaining strict security and compliance controls with full data isolation:

    - customizable compute layer enabling the use of different memory stores (Redis, etc.) tailored to access patterns and performance requirements
    - inherit existing security groups, policies, and ACLs
    - co-located resources and full-control over data residency to meet compliance requirements

> With Chalk, Data Engineers get high-throughput, low-latency pipelines that are highly available without the overhead of configuring YAML, writing custom scripts, or stitching together disparate tools.

Reviewer: somewhere in here we should link to the architecture overview page

> ## A full-stack solution for building and deploying enterprise AI

Reviewer: line break

> Chalk gives AI, ML, and data teams the building blocks to prototype and deploy production AI and ML systems quickly and reliably.

Author: definitely lol

> Whether you’re building a recommendation system, enterprise RAG, or fighting fraud, Chalk is the platform for low-latency, real-time ML at scale.

Reviewer: enterprise rag doesn't really fit with the other two items here: recsys and fraud are solutions, and rag is more of a product

<RequestingFeaturesOnline style={{ height: 328 }} />

**Observability**

Chalk enables teams to monitor and trace features back to the source, reducing governance bottlenecks by providing audit-ready records of all inputs and outputs for compliance.

- tracks the inputs, outputs and latencies of every step in any inference for debugging and monitoring
- provides detailed feature lineage showing data provenance and transformation history
- enables real-time monitoring of feature drift, access patterns, and performance across model deployments

Chalk transforms observability from a technical challenge into a strategic advantage, giving you the confidence to deploy and iterate on ML systems with full visibility and control.

## Chalk for AI Engineers

Build enterprise-grade AI applications without stitching together LLMs, prompts, vector DBs, and retrieval logic.

- retrieve real-time context into LLMs
- call chat completion APIs out-of-the-box
- generate embeddings and vectors within pipelines
- run large-scale evaluations using historical traffic

> - reuse and manage prompts with Named Prompts

Reviewer: can we link here? also i dont think this should get capitaliation

```py
# Use structured output to easily incorporate unstructured data in our ML pipelines
class AnalyzedReceiptStruct(BaseModel):
    expense_category: ExpenseCategoryEnum
    business_expense: bool
    loyalty_program: str
    return_policy: int

@features

> class Transaction:

Reviewer: this class is missing a primary key

Author: done!

    merchant_id: Merchant.id
    merchant: Merchant
    receipt: Receipt

    llm: P.PromptResponse = P.completion(
        model="gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18",
        messages=[P.user_message(
            "””Analyze the following receipt:
            Line items: {{Transaction.receipt.line_items}}
            Merchant: {{Transaction.merchant.name}} {{Transaction.merchant.description}}”””
        )],
        output_structure=AnalyzedReceiptStruct,
    )

@features
class ProductRec:

>     user_id: Primary[str]

Reviewer: should be User.id as they pkey type, otherwise join is ill-defined

    user: User

    user_vector: Vector = embed(
        input=F.array_join(F.array_agg(
            _.user.products[
                _.name,
                _.type == "liked"
            ]),
            delimiter=" || ",
        ),
        provider="vertexai",
        model="text-embedding-005",
    )

    similar_users: DataFrame[User] = has_many(
      lambda: ProductRec.user_vector.is_near(
            User.liked_products_vector
        )
    )
```

With Chalk, AI engineers get a fully managed feature platform to focus on building and deploying AI-powered applications rather than deploying infrastructure, debugging data pipelines, or managing vector databases.

## Chalk for Data Scientists

Test new features, run experiments, and ship production models—all from a Jupyter notebook.

- catch regressions and A/B test features on development branches
- import features from production into Jupyter notebooks with a single line of code
- export features to catalogs like Iceberg for downstream analytics and usage
- trace data lineage all the way down to source tables

```python
from chalk.client import ChalkClient

> client = ChalkClient(branch="elvis")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
client = ChalkClient(branch=True)
```

client.load_features() # load prod features with one line

User.name_exclaimed = _.name + "!" # add new features

chalk_dataset = client.offline_query(
    input={
        User.id: list(range(1000)),
    },
    output={
        User.id,
        User.name,
        User.name_exclaimed,
    },
    recompute_features=True, # A/B test against historical model runs

>     run_asynchronously=True,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>     dataset_name="<dataset_name>",

Reviewer: let's use an example name, like `fraud_model`

)

df = chalk_dataset.to_pandas() # convert to pandas dataframe

# write to Glue or Iceberg
catalog = GlueCatalog(
    name="aws_glue_catalog",
    aws_region="us-west-2",
    catalog_id="123",
    aws_role_arn="arn:aws:iam::123456789012:role/OurCatalogueAccessRole",
)
chalk_dataset.write_to(destination="database.table_name", catalog=catalog)
```

> Chalk evaluates features with point-in-time lookups guaranteeing evaluation only with data that would have been seen in the past, this means that you can provide labels with different past timestamps to easily get historical features that represent what your application would have retrieved online at those past times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chalk evaluates features with point-in-time lookups, guaranteeing evaluation only with data that would have been seen in the past. This means that you can provide labels with different past timestamps to easily get historical features that represent what your application would have retrieved online at those past times.
```

<DocsHero />

Build, deploy, and iterate faster with Chalk — a programmable feature engine that powers low-latency inference, rapid model iteration, and observability across your model lifecycle.
Chalk solves core pain points teams face when building enterprise AI and ML systems:

- deploying and scaling production-grade infrastructure

> - authoring feature pipelines in pure Python — No DSLs! No rewrites!

Reviewer: the header for this list of stuff is "core pain points", so this ends up saying "writing code in python sux", kind of the opposite of our intended message. I think either the header needs to change, we should drop the bullets, or some of these bullets need to change. Maybe it would be nice to focus on the positives we enable, instead of what is painful?

- building training datasets with high throughput batch offline queries and point-in-time correctness
- evaluating LLMs at scale by integrating unstructured inputs into pipelines
- serving fresh features on-the-fly with versioning, branching, and full observability
    - gradually rollout, easily rollback, and feature flag models with version control
    - collaborate across teams with branch-based QA
    - A/B test with real historical production traffic by leveraging Chalk’s feature store

---

## How does Chalk make feature engineering easier?

Define features using Pythonic classes in Chalk — no DSLs required.
Every feature is:
- typed and validated
- versioned and testable
- composable and reusable in both training and online inference

Describe relationships between entities (e.g., users and transactions) with simple type annotations, and Chalk takes care of joins, lineage, and query planning automatically.

```py
import chalk.functions as F

> from chalk import features, DataFrame, Windowed, windowed, _

Reviewer: we need to `from chalk.features import features`. as written this is importing the module and treating the module as a decorator, which is going to be a bad time

@features
class Transaction:
    id: int
    amount: float
    discount_percentage: float
    at: datetime

    # create new features inline with Chalk Expressions
    is_expensive_purchase: bool = _.amount > 100

    # instead of declaring user_id as a string type (user_id: str),
    # reference a feature from another class
    user_id: "User.id"

    # Chalk infers the "User.id" join key, enabling you to reference
    # the User associated with this transaction!
    user: "User"

@features
class User:
    # id, name, email are pulled from underlying data sources like
    # SQL (Postgres, Athena, Glue, Iceberg), Snowflake, Databricks, Kafka streams, etc.
    id: int
    name: str
    email: str

    # computed via a Python resolver, more on this later
    username: str

>     # Chalk SDK provides common ML primitives

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Chalk SDK provides common functions that run in C++
```

    name_match: float = F.levenshtein_distance(_.name, _.email)

    # leverages "User.id" type annotation from Transaction class

>     # as a join key to create intermediary dataframes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # as a join key to create an intermediary DataFrame
```

    txns: DataFrame[Transaction]

>     # reference dataframes to run aggregations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # reference DataFrames to run aggregations
```

    transaction_count: int = _.txns.count()

>     # easily filter dataframes before running an aggregation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # easily filter DataFrames before running an aggregation
```

─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
 17    "2024-12-06T19:53:21.575073+00:00"  "failed"            27       16281       2           34                        20364                               "2024-12-06T00:36:07.348750+00:00"
 18    "2024-11-27T01:50:03.002378+00:00"  "failed"            27       16282       1           71.41                     20362                               "2024-11-26T11:29:03.684327+00:00"
 5440  null                                "pending"           27       16357       1           62.64                     20180                               "2024-11-16T17:29:43.540722+00:00"
 67    "2024-11-29T04:08:29.746079+00:00"  "cleared"           27       16358       1           86.31                     20179                               "2024-11-28T04:11:31.857431+00:00"
 68    "2024-11-11T11:35:40.673632+00:00"  "cleared"           27       16359       1           138.38                    20178                               "2024-11-11T01:19:53.140456+00:00"

> (5 rows)

Reviewer: could you move all the timestamp stuff to the end column? The other stuff is more interesting, but mostly, we're going to see timestamps

Author: Done!

```

When running this query, Chalk only fetches exactly the base features needed to return `name_match` and `txns`.

Chalk analyzes type annotations to build a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of feature dependencies.
At inference time, query plans tailored to your input/output schema are generated dynamically by slicing this DAG into sub-graphs.

> This ensures that only the features needed are fetched--optimizing for speed, precision, and cost.

Reviewer: emdash

Author: done!

Each node in the DAG is a Chalk expression or resolver (SQL / Python):

- An expression e.g. `is_expensive_purchase: bool = _.amount > 100`
- A SQL file that connects to an underlying data store like Athena

> - Python resolver i.e. ordinary Python functions (Pandas, httpx, or LLM calls)

Reviewer: i think the capitalization on these bullets is probably nicer -- could we update the other lists to use the same style?

Here's an example of a generated query plan:

![Chalk query plan](/img/docs-what_is_chalk-query_plan.png)

### How does Chalk resolve features? What are Chalk resolvers?

> Chalk connects directly to your existing infrastructure and underlying data stores (Athena, Bigquery, Postgres, Iceberg catalog, etc.) with [SQL resolvers](https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/sql-resolvers) and to APIs (microservices, 3rd part clients, LLMs) with [Python resolvers.](https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/python-resolvers)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chalk connects directly to your existing infrastructure and underlying data stores (Athena, BigQuery, Postgres, Iceberg catalog, etc.) with [SQL resolvers](https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/sql-resolvers) and to APIs (microservices, 3rd-party clients, LLMs) with [Python resolvers](https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/python-resolvers).
```

Resolvers make it easy to integrate a wide variety of data sources, join them together, and use them in inference.

Decoupling feature logic from ETL pipelines unlocks

- faster iteration cycles
- on-demand just-in-time inference

> - reproducible and testable features (with point-in-time accuracy)

Reviewer: capitalize the first word to fit with the style above

<IntegrationTypes />

### How does Chalk orchestrate and manage features?

Chalk has built-in support for feature engineering workflows — there's no need to manage Airflow or orchestrate complicated streaming flows.
Once you've defined features and resolvers, Chalk orchestrates them into flexible pipelines (slicing the DAG) that make both training and model execution easy.

The `get_username` function below explicitly defines input dependencies through `User.email` and specifies the output feature type as `User.username`:

```py
@online
def get_username(
    # the input type annotation specifies the required feature
    email: User.email,
    # the resulting feature is saved as username unto User class
) -> User.username:
    username = email.split("@")[0]
    if "gmail.com" in email:
        username = username.split("+")[0].replace(".", "")

    return username.lower()
```

> Although written in Python, this function compiles into a static Velox expression through Chalk's Symbolic Python Interpreter and executes natively in C++.

Reviewer: we first really introduce Velox 100 lines below, so maybe this instead talks about going to Chalk Expressions, and then we later talk about how chalk expressions are fast b/c velox?

> This provides Python-first development without sacrificing sub-5ms inference latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This provides Python-first development without sacrificing performance.
```

```py
lower(
    if_then_else(
        !=(
            strpos(str(email), str(gmail.com)),
            int(0)
        ),
        replace(
            element_at(
                split(
                    element_at(split(str(email), str(@)), int(1)),
                    str(+)
                ),
                int(1)
            ),
            str(.),
            str()
        ),
        element_at(split(str(email), str(@)), int(1))
    )
)
```

We wrote an [engineering blog post on our Symbolic Python interpreter](https://chalk.ai/blog/symbolic-python-interpreter) if you want to learn more!

> ### How can I cache features in Chalk?

Reviewer: The `I` is a little odd to me in the context of the rest of the doc -- it shows up only here and in the next header

Some data sources, like LLMs or 3rd party APIs, are expensive or slow to call at inference time.
Chalk supports caching features to optimize for latency and cost:

- define cache windows inline with your features
- override staleness at query-time when fresh data is critical

> - pre-warm caches and backfill pipelines for performance

Reviewer: capiotalization

Add a caching policy with one line of code in our feature definition:

<PyDiffEditor html={addCachingCode} />

### How do I deploy and query features with Chalk?

> After defining pipelines, deploy features to a branch in < 1s with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After defining pipelines, deploy features to a branch in <100ms with:
```

> Chalk automatically detects and uses your current git branch name without requiring you to explicitly specify it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chalk automatically detects and uses your current Git branch name without requiring you to explicitly specify it:
```

```shell

> chalk apply --branch

Reviewer: can we show what gets printed after?

Reviewer: I tihnk this is still missing? I would expect to see something like "Branch deploy to ... succeeded!" and a checkmark or something

Author: It's there I just had text in between the command and the output of the command. I reduced the amount of text to make it more clear

```

Query for features against this branch and perform QA workflows on branch deployments to ensure pipelines perform as expected:

```shell
chalk query --branch --in user.id=47
```

This command returns the user's features from your branch deployment, showing all computed fields for the specified `user.id`.

```
Using '--out=user'
Results

> https://chalk.ai/environments/{environment}/query-runs/{query_id}

Reviewer: maybe some fake numbers instead of this format string?

Branch: elvis

> Environment: {environment}

Reviewer: probably better to show something like `Prod` here

 Name                                             Hit?  Value
─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
 user.average_rating_given                  4.3125
 user.birthday                              "1987-12-28"
 user.created_at                            "2024-08-07T20:54:42.942294+00:00"
 user.email                                 "98178ad58fe8481db74996996d6e8de7@google.ru"
 user.first_name                            "Marseda"
 user.id                                    47
 user.last_name                             "Karkaletsis"
 user.review_count                          32
 user.total_orders_placed                   48
 user.unique_products_inquired_about        203
```

> Once validated, promote the deployment to production, which is served at a unique preview URL.

Reviewer: we don't really do the preview URLs anymore. the blue/green deployments are our answer for rolling this stuff out smoothly

Author: done!

```shell
chalk apply
```

These features are now available for low-latency [online inference](/docs/query-basics) and [offline training](/docs/training-client).
The ability to re-use the same features in both contexts dramatically shortens development time and ensures that feature values from online and offline contexts match.

---

## Why Chalk?

Chalk is the first platform to unify feature and prompt engineering, LLM evals, and real-time inference into a unified platform.
Bridge the gap between experimentation and production with a single system that unifies offline and online inference.

> Chalk retrieves and computes dynamically at inference time with an execution engine called [Velox](https://github.com/facebookincubator/velox)--we maintain a fork that’s been heavily optimized for low-latency (< 3 ms).

Reviewer: emdash

> Chalk retrieves and computes dynamically at inference time with an execution engine called [Velox](https://github.com/facebookincubator/velox)--we maintain a fork that’s been heavily optimized for low-latency (< 3 ms).

Reviewer: sentence ends in an adjective

```suggestion
Chalk retrieves and computes dynamically at inference time with an execution engine called [Velox](https://github.com/facebookincubator/velox)--we maintain a fork that’s been heavily optimized for low-latency responses (<3 ms).
```

Unifying online and offline execution enables teams to

- consolidate training and serving into a single version controlled environment
- reduce time-to-production for new models from months to days

> - build advanced AI systems (RAG, RecSys, Fraud detection, etc.) without building custom infrastructure

Reviewer: capitalization of the starts of the bullets. I don't think Fraud should get capitalization here, b/c it's not an abbreviation? i also have mixed feelings about RAG with these other two -- RAG is a product or strategy, where the other two are industries

Author: fixed!

**No DSLs, no rewrites, just ordinary Python**

> Define features in Python that are run natively in Rust, C++, or as UDFs — no need to manually port notebooks and code into other languages e.g. Scala.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Define features in Python that are run natively in Rust or C++ — no need to rewrite notebook code into other faster languages manually.
```

**See everything, debug anything**

Traditional ML systems often operate as opaque black boxes, especially when transformation logic gets embedded across disparate data pipelines, obscuring the connection between inputs and predictions.
Chalk disrupts this paradigm by bringing comprehensive observability to every aspect of your ML systems; easily

- trace every model feature back to its original data sources with detailed lineage tracking — showing exactly where data came from
- troubleshoot and optimize your ML pipelines with end-to-end tracing that tracks the inputs and outputs of every step in any run
- monitor feature drift, access patterns, and performance metrics in real-time across all your model deployments

Iterate faster and deploy with confidence — knowing exactly how your systems behave at each step of the machine learning lifecycle.

---

## Chalk for MLOps

Let Chalk handle orchestrating, caching, and serving features at scale freeing up you and your team to focus on building models—not plumbing.

> Democratize modern software engineering practices, with Chalk

Reviewer: my marketing brain goes off when i see democratize, but maybe that's just me :)

Author: Fixed@

- features are discoverable and auditable across all environments
- experimental changes are isolated to branches and safely promoted via CLI with gradual rollouts

> - models are versioned and can be easily rolled-back the same way you would an API

Reviewer: capitalization

<DocsHero />

Build, deploy, and iterate faster with Chalk — a programmable feature engine that powers low-latency inference, rapid model iteration, and observability across your model lifecycle.
Chalk solves core pain points teams face when building enterprise AI and ML systems:

- Deploying and scaling production-grade infrastructure

> - Authoring feature pipelines in pure Python — No DSLs! No rewrites!

Reviewer: I think my same comment from before is maybe still relevant here? The header of this list is

> Chalk solves core pain points teams face when building enterprise AI and ML systems:

so when I read this bullet, I read

> Authoring feature pipelines in pure Python is a pain point teams face when building enterprise AI and ML systems

but we believe that authoring pipelines in Python is good!

wdyt?

Author: Fixed!

- Building training datasets with high throughput batch offline queries and point-in-time correctness
- Integrating unstructured data into production ML pipelines with LLMs
- Serving fresh features on-the-fly with versioning, branching, and full observability
    - Gradually rollout, easily rollback, and feature flag models with version control
    - Collaborate across teams with branch-based QA
    - A/B testing models and LLM prompts with real historical traffic

Chalk is the first platform to unify feature and prompt engineering, LLM evals, and real-time low-latency inference into a unified platform.

---

## How does Chalk make feature engineering easier?

Define features using Pythonic classes — no DSLs required.
Every feature is:
- Typed and validated
- Versioned and testable
- Composable and reusable in both training and online inference

Describe relationships between entities (e.g., users and transactions) with simple type annotations, and Chalk takes care of joins, lineage, and query planning automatically.

```py
import chalk.functions as F
from chalk.features import features

> from chalk import  DataFrame, Windowed, windowed, _

Reviewer: extra space 
```suggestion
from chalk import DataFrame, Windowed, windowed, _
```

@features
class Transaction:
    id: int
    amount: float
    discount_percentage: float
    at: datetime

    # create new features inline with Chalk Expressions
    is_expensive_purchase: bool = _.amount > 100

    # instead of declaring user_id as a string type (user_id: str)
    # reference a feature from another class to create a join key
    user_id: "User.id"

    # "User.id" now enables you to reference the
    # User class associated with this transaction!
    user: "User"

@features
class User:
    # id, name, email are pulled from underlying data sources like
    # Postgres, Kafka, Iceberg, Athena, Snowflake, Databricks, etc.
    # with a SQL resolver
    id: int
    name: str
    email: str

>     # computed with `get_username`
>     # a Python resolver (function)

Reviewer: aligning the length with what we did above

```suggestion
    # computed with the Python resolver (function) `get_username`
```

    username: str

    # Chalk's SDK provides common functions that run in C++
    name_match: float = F.levenshtein_distance(_.name, _.email)

>     # create an intermediate DataFrame of another feature class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # create an intermediate DataFrame of another feature class.
```

<IntegrationTypes />

### How does Chalk orchestrate and manage features?

Chalk has built-in support for feature engineering workflows — there's no need to manage Airflow or orchestrate complicated streaming flows.
Once you've defined features and resolvers, Chalk orchestrates them into flexible pipelines (slicing the DAG) that make both training and model execution easy.

The `get_username` Python resolver below explicitly defines input dependencies as `User.email` and specifies the output feature type as `User.username`:

```py
@online
def get_username(
    # the input type annotation specifies the input feature
    email: User.email,
    # the resulting feature is saved as username unto User class
) -> User.username:
    username = email.split("@")[0]
    if "gmail.com" in email:
        username = username.split("+")[0].replace(".", "")

    return username.lower()
```

### How do you cache features with Chalk?

Some data sources, like LLMs or 3rd party APIs, are expensive or slow to call at inference time.
Chalk supports caching features to optimize for latency and cost:

- Define cache windows inline with your features

> - Override staleness at query-time when fresh data is critical

Reviewer: good link for this here:

https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/query-caching

> - Pre-warm caches and backfill pipelines for performance

Reviewer: https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/reverse-etl

Add a caching policy with one line of code in our feature definition:

<PyDiffEditor html={addCachingCode} />

### How do you deploy and query features with Chalk?

After defining pipelines, deploy features to a branch in < 100ms with:

> Chalk automatically detects and uses your current Git branch name without requiring you to explicitly specify it:

Reviewer: Looks like these got squished together in a refactor

```

Query for features against this branch and perform QA workflows on branch deployments to ensure pipelines perform as expected:

```shell
chalk query --branch --in user.id=47
```

This command returns the user's features from your branch deployment, showing all computed fields for the specified `user.id`.

```
Using '--out=user'
Results
https://chalk.ai/environments/devx/query-runs/4701020347
Branch: elvis
Environment: devx

 Name                                             Hit?  Value
─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
 user.average_rating_given                  4.3125
 user.birthday                              "1987-12-28"
 user.created_at                            "2024-08-07T20:54:42.942294+00:00"
 user.email                                 "98178ad58fe8481db74996996d6e8de7@google.ru"
 user.first_name                            "Marseda"
 user.id                                    47
 user.last_name                             "Karkaletsis"
 user.review_count                          32
 user.total_orders_placed                   48
 user.unique_products_inquired_about        203

> ```

Reviewer: can we collapse this into the shell output all together?

Author: not sure what you mean

Author: do you mean having an accordion component so the code block can be minimized and expanded?

Once you validate the deployment, promote it to production with a single CLI command and no downtime (blue-green deployments).

```shell
chalk apply
```

These features are now available for low-latency [online inference](/docs/query-basics) and [offline training](/docs/training-client).

---

## Why Chalk?

Features are computed at inference time with an execution engine called [Velox](https://github.com/facebookincubator/velox) — we maintain a fork that's been heavily optimized for low-latency (< 3 ms).
Chalk's low-latency execution enables us to bridge the gap between experimentation and production by unifying offline and online inference.
With this unified approach, teams can easily:

- Establish a single source of truth for feature definitions and transformations
- Consolidate training and serving into a single version controlled environment
- Reduce time-to-production for new models from months to days
- Standardize and share features across the entire organization

> Chalk offers the developer-friendly experience of Python while achieving high performance by transpiling functions like `get_username` into optimized Velox expressions using a Symbolic Python Interpreter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chalk offers the developer-friendly experience of Python while achieving high performance by transpiling functions like `get_username` into optimized Velox expressions using a symbolic Python interpreter.
```

```py
lower(
    if_then_else(
        !=(
            strpos(str(email), str(gmail.com)),
            int(0)
        ),
        replace(
            element_at(
                split(
                    element_at(split(str(email), str(@)), int(1)),
                    str(+)
                ),
                int(1)
            ),
            str(.),
            str()
        ),
        element_at(split(str(email), str(@)), int(1))
    )
)
```

We wrote an [engineering blog post on our Symbolic Python interpreter](https://chalk.ai/blog/symbolic-python-interpreter) if you want to learn more!

### Observability

Traditional ML systems often operate as opaque black boxes, especially when transformation logic gets embedded across disparate data pipelines, obscuring the connection between inputs and predictions.
Chalk brings comprehensive observability to every aspect of your ML systems, making it easy to:

> - Trace every model feature back to its original data sources with detailed lineage tracking — showing exactly where data came from

Reviewer: small refactor to remove the hanging preposition

```suggestion
- Trace every model feature back to its original data sources with detailed lineage tracking, showing exactly where the data originated
```

- Troubleshoot and optimize your ML pipelines with end-to-end tracing that tracks the inputs and outputs of every step in any run
- Monitor feature drift, access patterns, and performance metrics in real-time across all your model deployments

> Deploy faster and with confidence — knowing exactly how your systems behave at each step of the machine learning lifecycle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deploy faster and confidently, knowing exactly how your systems behave at each step of the machine learning lifecycle.
```

---

## Chalk for MLOps

> Let Chalk handle orchestrating, caching, and serving features at scale freeing up you and your team to focus on building models—not plumbing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let Chalk handle orchestrating, caching, and serving features at scale, freeing you and your team to focus on building models, not plumbing.
```

Chalk brings modern software engineering to data workflows:

- Features are discoverable and auditable across all environments
- Experimental changes are isolated to branches and safely promoted via CLI with gradual rollouts
- Models are versioned and can be easily rolled-back the same way you would an API

> Easily serve features across your entire tech stack with SDKs in Python, JavaScript, Java and more - making inference accessible to any team whether for internal tools or customer-facing applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Easily serve features across your entire tech stack with [SDKs](https://docs.chalk.ai/docs/query-basics) in Python, JavaScript, Java and more - making inference accessible to any team whether for internal tools or customer-facing applications.
```

class AnalyzedReceiptStruct(BaseModel):
    expense_category: ExpenseCategoryEnum
    business_expense: bool
    loyalty_program: str
    return_policy: int

@features
class Transaction:
    id: int
    merchant_id: Merchant.id
    merchant: Merchant
    receipt: Receipt

    llm: P.PromptResponse = P.completion(
        model="gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18",
        messages=[P.user_message(
            "””Analyze the following receipt:
            Line items: {{Transaction.receipt.line_items}}
            Merchant: {{Transaction.merchant.name}} {{Transaction.merchant.description}}”””
        )],
        output_structure=AnalyzedReceiptStruct,
    )

@features
class ProductRec:
    user_id: Primary[User.id]
    user: User

    user_vector: Vector = embed(
        input=F.array_join(F.array_agg(
            _.user.products[
                _.name,
                _.type == "liked"
            ]),
            delimiter=" || ",
        ),
        provider="vertexai",
        model="text-embedding-005",
    )

    similar_users: DataFrame[User] = has_many(
      lambda: ProductRec.user_vector.is_near(
            User.liked_products_vector
        )
    )
```

> With Chalk, AI engineers easily integrate unstructured data, build context-aware prompts, and run LLM evaluations at scale—all without managing vector databases, embedding providers, and complex retrieval systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Chalk, AI engineers easily integrate unstructured data, build context-aware prompts, and run LLM evaluations at scale — all without managing vector databases, embedding providers, and complex retrieval systems.
```

---

## Chalk for Data Scientists

> Test new features, run experiments, and ship production models—all from a Jupyter notebook.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Test new features, run experiments, and ship production models — all from a Jupyter notebook.
```

- Catch regressions and A/B test features on development branches
- Import features from production into Jupyter notebooks with a single line of code
- Export features to catalogs like Iceberg for downstream analytics and usage
- Trace data lineage all the way down to source tables

```python
from chalk.client import ChalkClient

client = ChalkClient(branch=True)
client.load_features() # load prod features with one line

User.name_exclaimed = _.name + "!" # add new features

chalk_dataset = client.offline_query(
    input={
        User.id: list(range(1000)),
    },
    output={
        User.id,
        User.name,
        User.name_exclaimed,
    },
    recompute_features=True, # A/B test against historical model runs
    dataset_name="fraud_model",
)

df = chalk_dataset.to_pandas() # convert to pandas dataframe

# write to Glue or Iceberg
catalog = GlueCatalog(
    name="aws_glue_catalog",
    aws_region="us-west-2",
    catalog_id="123",
    aws_role_arn="arn:aws:iam::123456789012:role/OurCatalogueAccessRole",
)
chalk_dataset.write_to(destination="database.table_name", catalog=catalog)
```

> Chalk evaluates features with point-in-time lookups, guaranteeing evaluation only with data that would have been seen in the past. This means that you can provide labels with different past timestamps to easily get historical features that represent what your application would have retrieved online at those past times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chalk evaluates features with point-in-time lookups, guaranteeing evaluation only with data that would have been seen in the past. You can provide labels with different past timestamps to easily get historical features that represent what your application would have retrieved online at those past times.
```

<TemporalCorrectness />

> With Chalk, data scientists easily integrate new data sources, test new features with [point-in-time correctness,](docs/temporal-consistency) and collaborate with Git-like branches and flexible data exports (to data catalogs, Parquet, Iceberg, etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Chalk, data scientists easily integrate new data sources, test new features with [point-in-time correctness](docs/temporal-consistency), and collaborate with Git-like branches and flexible data exports (to data catalogs like Parquet and Iceberg).
```

---

## Chalk for Data Engineers

Manage features declaratively without the complexity of orchestrating ETL jobs, feature stores, and offline/online datastores.

> Chalk makes it easy to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chalk makes it easy to:
```

- Cache expensive computations with configurable staleness
- Manage model versions and A/B test features
- Create complex joins and relationships between data entities

> - Configure time-window aggregations with flexible materialization options

Reviewer: i think we probably have good links for all of these!

Author: added links

```python

> @features

Reviewer: let's show all the imports above, too

Author: added imports
